Dune tool management requirements (#13457)
ocaml/dune: doc/dev/tools-design/implementation.md

    - [Ephemeral runs](#ephemeral-runs)
    - [Batch install](#batch-install)
    - [Binary selection](#binary-selection)
    - [Tool discovery](#tool-discovery)
    - [Tool upgrade](#tool-upgrade)
    - [System-wide install](#system-wide-install)
  - [Recommendations from Research](#recommendations-from-research)
- [Learnings from the Prototype](#learnings-from-the-prototype)
  - [What Worked Well](#what-worked-well)
  - [Problems Discovered](#problems-discovered)
  - [Reference Packages for Testing](#reference-packages-for-testing)
- [Ideas](#ideas)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

### The `(tool)` stanza

_Implements: [1.3 Version specification](./requirements.md#14-version-specification),
[1.6 Binary selection](./requirements.md#16-binary-selection),
[3.1 Compiler compatibility](./requirements.md#31-compiler-compatibility),
[4.2 Persistent configuration](./requirements.md#42-persistent-configuration)_

Tools are declared in `dune-workspace` using the `(tool)` stanza. The stanza
uses the same dependency syntax as `(depends ...)` for the package field.

#### Syntax

```lisp
(tool
 (package <package-dependency>)   ; Required: package name with optional constraint

>  (executable <string>)            ; Optional: binary name, defaults to package name

Author: Let's consider:

```suggestion
 (executables <string list>)            ; Optional: binary names, defaults to all binaries provided by the package
```

>  (skip_compiler_match)            ; Optional: flag to disable compiler matching

Author: This should probably be a binary, so we can both disable and enable, as may be needed:

```suggestion
 (match_compiler <bool>)            ; Optional: flag to disable or enable compiler matching
```

build artifacts from a differently-compiled project, causing "corrupted compiled
interface" errors ([#11229]).

[#11229]: https://github.com/ocaml/dune/issues/11229

#### 6.6. Ephemeral runs

No `uvx`-style temporary execution mode. Tools must be locked before running.

Building OCaml tools from source is slow compared to downloading Python wheels,
so discarding the build after one use would be wasteful. Locking caches the
build for reuse. Users who want to try a tool temporarily can use
`dune tools add`, run it, then `dune tools remove`.

CR-soon Alizter: Mention that autolocking makes this somewhat feasable, but it cannot
be relied on as it will roll to the newer versions. There are no binary
installs so therefore it would be slow also

## Specification

### The `(tool)` stanza

_Implements: [1.3 Version pinning](#13-version-pinning),
[1.6 Binary selection](#16-binary-selection),
[3.1 Compiler compatibility](#31-compiler-compatibility),
[4.2 Persistent configuration](#42-persistent-configuration)_

Tools are declared in `dune-workspace` using the `(tool)` stanza. The stanza
uses the same dependency syntax as `(depends ...)` for the package field.

#### Syntax

```lisp

> (tool

Author: If this means "constraints on what versions the tools own dependencies must satisfy", then I wonder if it is actually something we need to consider? What is the use case when someone needs to install an executable tool and also needs to specify which particular versions of libraries that tool uses to build, rather than just the version of the tool itself? I can't think of any, once you eliminate the problem of interfering deps between different tools.

Notably, AFAICT, being able to configure this would would not satisfy any need inn the requirements.

> (tool

Reviewer: For a specific example: this was a feature needed while working with OxCaml. It could be a special case, but I'd imagine the same would be the case with any compiler branches. I think it will be useful to be able to specify them at the tool level, unless Dune has a smart way to infer them by itself..

> (tool

Author: Could you share the example you have in mind? That would help clarify for me, I expect.

> (tool

Reviewer: See the config here for example: https://github.com/oxcaml/opam-repository/pull/51#issuecomment-4691610237

> (tool

Author: We discussed this in the design meeting! I think we are clear on it.

The compiler is detected in this order:

1. **Project compiler** - if using dune package management with a `dune.lock/`
2. **System OCaml** - from opam switch or PATH
3. **Any compatible version** - if no compiler is detected

When `(skip_compiler_match)` is set, the tool is solved without compiler
constraints, allowing it to use any OCaml version.

CR-soon Alizter: Edge cases for compiler matching:

- No compiler found (no opam switch, no system OCaml): error, or pick any?
- System OCaml version changes between `add` and `run`: rebuild, or warn?
- Tool requires newer OCaml than project: error message?

#### Examples

```lisp
;; Minimal: just the package name
(tool
 (package ocamlformat))

;; With version constraint
(tool
 (package
  (ocamlformat
   (= 0.26.2))))

;; With version range
(tool
 (package
  (ocamlformat
   (and
    (>= 0.25.0)
    (< 0.27.0)))))

;; Specifying the binary for multi-binary packages
(tool
 (package menhir)
 (executable menhirSdk))

;; Tool that doesn't need compiler matching
(tool
 (package ocamlformat)
 (skip_compiler_match))

;; Using a binary package repository
(tool
 (package ocaml-lsp-server)

>  (repositories binary-packages))

Reviewer: This example is perhaps not in line with 6.5, which states that tools are always built from source.

#### Compiler matching

Tools are built with a compiler version matching the project to ensure ABI
compatibility.

**Dune** (Req 3.1): Automatic by default. Tools match project compiler or system
OCaml. Opt-out via `(skip_compiler_match)`.

**uv**: ✗ Tools ignore project-level Python version settings. "Tool environment
details: Each tool environment is linked to a specific Python version... but
will ignore non-global Python version requests like `.python-version` files and
the `requires-python` value from a `pyproject.toml`." ([uv docs])

**cargo**: ✓* Via rustup (not cargo itself): `rust-toolchain.toml` in the
*current directory* affects `cargo install`. Note: this uses *your project's\*
toolchain, not the tool's - a known issue ([rust-lang/cargo#11036]). ([rustup
docs])

[rust-lang/cargo#11036]: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/11036

**cargo-run-bin**: ✗ Uses whatever Rust toolchain is active.

**npm**: ✗ No automatic matching. Packages declare Node version via `engines`
field, but npm only warns by default (requires `.npmrc` `engine-strict=true` to
enforce). Native addons use ABI version matching via node-pre-gyp. ([npm docs:
package.json])

#### PATH fallback

> When a tool is not installed via the tool manager, fall back to system PATH.

Reviewer: This is presumably also to accommodate platform tools trying to use `dune tools`. In which case it would be useful to solicit opinions of platform tools developers on this.

  not just constraints
- **Ephemeral run mode** (from uv's `uvx`): See
  [Non-requirement 6.6](#66-ephemeral-runs)
- **System-wide linking** (from uv): See
  [Non-requirement 6.1](#61-system-wide-installation)

[uv docs]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/tools/
[uv docs: uvx]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/tools/#running-tools
[cargo docs]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/commands/cargo-install.html
[cargo#5120]: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/5120
[rustup docs]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/overrides.html
[cargo-run-bin]: https://github.com/dustinblackman/cargo-run-bin
[npm docs]: https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/
[npm docs: folders]: https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/folders
[npm docs: package.json]:
  https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/configuring-npm/package-json
[npm docs: bin]: https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/commands/npm-bin
[npm docs: update]: https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/commands/npm-update
[npx docs]: https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/commands/npx
[npm v7 changes]:
  https://blog.npmjs.org/post/626173315965468672/npm-v7-series-beta-release-and-semver-major.html

## Learnings from the Prototype

> CR-soon Alizter: This entire section may be considered garbage. Extract

Reviewer: This needs a pass before merging.
